I think we can start.
NOTE CONF
Is it just me or the class is way too
empty?
NOTE CONF
Um, Let's hope in the 1st 10 minutes, someone will
come.
NOTE CONF
Or more students would come more than the dozen or
so here.
NOTE CONF
Um, All right.
So, we're gonna talk about a fairly easier topic.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's one of those topics which is central to
a lot of things that we do invisibly.
NOTE CONF
Um, but, Something that we don't pay attention.
I'm pretty sure all of you have compressed files, but
NOTE CONF
when you're communicating on the internet, any form of digital
communication involves a lot of compression.
NOTE CONF
So what we're going to do is take a veil
of at least the, the most fundamental aspects of compression.
NOTE CONF
We'll mostly deal with text compression, although Extrapolating it to
other forms of uh multi-mode modal streams, digital streams is
NOTE CONF
not too hard.
At least it's a good starting point to explore what
NOTE CONF
the main ideas are about.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So, I'll go through just some motivation.
These are not really examinable slides as much as to
NOTE CONF
motivate the topic.
But we do generate a lot of data of different
NOTE CONF
descriptions.
It could be text, images, movies, it becomes more and
NOTE CONF
more um Easier to generate data of various descriptions.
So you would have, you have done for general purpose
NOTE CONF
files, you would have tried to compress files through Zip
or, or the GNU version of Zip or some variation
NOTE CONF
of Zip.
Um there is also all the other kinds of um
NOTE CONF
uh methods of compression.
There's multimedia in terms of images, all the image formats
NOTE CONF
that you have.
Um, many of them embedded a lot of compression.
NOTE CONF
And there are 20th century and 21st century digital communications
which involve um compression in the protocols of communication that
NOTE CONF
are behind the scenes.
Something that's invisibly done that you will know if you're
NOTE CONF
doing Zoom on someone.
There's a lot of compression that's happening on uh live
NOTE CONF
and the um the images, image and audio and video
is being delivered across to various recipients from the source.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a lot of compression every day.
And what is compression?
NOTE CONF
It's basically trying to take some amount of data, squeeze
it out down into a form that is very compact.
NOTE CONF
All right.
That that's what the word compressed means.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if you want to really compress anything, I'm
giving you a high level motivation before we dive into
NOTE CONF
some technical details, which are very easy to um comprehend.
But it's important to understand the ideas at the high
NOTE CONF
level first.
So if you want to compress something.
NOTE CONF
You would have to compress something that is sort of
gassy, um, that is repetitive, and so on.
NOTE CONF
So you want to sort of exploit repetitive patterns in
the data to be able to sort of not state
NOTE CONF
it explicitly over and over again when repetition.
Happen but to be able to say them once in
NOTE CONF
explicit form and everywhere else saying it's like that it's
like that that I've already seen so you're kind of
NOTE CONF
giving back pointers to what you have seen in some
some some um special way.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you think about the data that you want
to compress, you could see it in various levels of
NOTE CONF
views.
You can see the data to be composed of some
NOTE CONF
redundant parts somewhere in the data and some non-redundant parts.
Now, it's the redundant parts that you end up compressing.
NOTE CONF
You never will be able to compress.
The what is non-redundant or uh or random parts, the
NOTE CONF
parts that don't follow a trend, a certain set pattern,
yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, in many ways in statistics, you see this when
you are fitting models to data, statistical models to data.
NOTE CONF
You are, you have some real data, the heights of
people in the room.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume that I did the 101 of fitting.
Um, a normal distribution on the heights of people in
NOTE CONF
the room.
Heights are real numbers.
NOTE CONF
You just state the best mean and standard deviation that
can explain most of the data, not all the data
NOTE CONF
precisely.
And then that's your first part.
NOTE CONF
That's your uh model part.
And then, but that doesn't explain the real observed data
NOTE CONF
exactly.
So there's some random part, a part that is deviating
NOTE CONF
from the model that you have to explain or encode
in, in a special way to be able to make
NOTE CONF
the data lossless or losslessly compressible.
So you can see the data as some model plus
NOTE CONF
deviations.
In fact, much of what is happening in Gen AI
NOTE CONF
is a a fuzzy um compression.
There's an approx approximate repeats model even before neural nets
NOTE CONF
existed, people were working about how do you come up
with ways of making copies of things that are approximately
NOTE CONF
similar, if not exactly similar.
This lecture will focus on redundancies that are exactly similar.
NOTE CONF
So, Chat GPD is a, is a fuzzy memorization tool,
much like human beings, we remember things fuzzily.
NOTE CONF
Real neurons After the semester is over, if I ask
you about Jukinon, the fuzzy recollection of Jukinon.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so it's basically, um, we, we tend to
remember stuff, um, Uh, so you, you kind of have
NOTE CONF
some sort of chart GPT has some, some amount of
statistical mechanisms to be able to predict what comes next.
NOTE CONF
The prediction part is essentially, um, is, uh, based on
the ideas of compression, although the compression is implicit in
NOTE CONF
a, in a neural architecture.
We're not going to deep learning.
NOTE CONF
That's a different lecture altogether.
Um, but in the, the, there is compression embedded in
NOTE CONF
many things that we do.
So the data can be thought of as a model
NOTE CONF
with deviations.
And if, if you're doing standard channel encoding or basically
NOTE CONF
what an information theory is called, the internet is a
classical Shannon's channel.
NOTE CONF
If you have a channel, the channel will have a
signal and it'll have some noise.
NOTE CONF
So data over a certain Uh, channel can be viewed
as signal plus noise.
NOTE CONF
So it all these are sort of equivalent way of
looking at it.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to remember these things for the exam.
It's giving to motivation of what compression is.
NOTE CONF
Now, I want to also say that compression is not,
uh, uh, something that humans invented.
NOTE CONF
Um, in digital era, it is embedded in our human
evolution.
NOTE CONF
Our language is compressed.
If you ever think, think about the most frequent terms
NOTE CONF
that we use, they're usually monosyllable and bi-syllable.
You don't want to be saying something that is very
NOTE CONF
common if you're growing up, your mom and dad would
be somebody you would be addressing on a regular basis.
NOTE CONF
You wouldn't want to have long, uh, syllables to explain
them.
NOTE CONF
You kind of evolve these things, um.
Intelligence as we sort of seem to measure with various
NOTE CONF
intelligence is the is the hidden variable and we we
tend to measure them in terms of uh IQ tests
NOTE CONF
and all these proxies that we have, whatever that means.
Um, well, intelligence is a form of compression you have
NOTE CONF
a model of what you learn in some compact way
that can give you a a predictive ability if the
NOTE CONF
predictive ability is not.
Good enough, it's, we kind of classify I'm not that
NOTE CONF
intelligent, which is true for me.
But, and basically, or um if someone is very intelligent,
NOTE CONF
then you would say, well, I'm very, very, um, I,
my model is very predictive, you get high VAMs as
NOTE CONF
you will.
And, and, um, yeah, so you could basically say compression
NOTE CONF
is embedded in, in how we have evolved.
Mathematics is compression.
NOTE CONF
When you do algebra, you see a lot of symbols
that are compressing a lot of ideas in some compact
NOTE CONF
way.
So compression is there for a long time.
NOTE CONF
We've invented in modern communication things before digital communications.
Your uh braille code is a, a compressed form of
NOTE CONF
code, um.
Which tends to assign short sort of codes for uh
NOTE CONF
smaller uh entities or smaller syllables, longer codes for longer
entities, so you have Morse code for teletype, which is
NOTE CONF
variable.
So there are codes that are based on ideas of
NOTE CONF
compression, but but dot codes for teletype.
I don't know if you've ever seen a teletype machine,
NOTE CONF
but I'm only flaunting how I'm a dinosaur.
So, um, so.
NOTE CONF
So what's the main idea?
So the main idea is that just as you have
NOTE CONF
a file, file is your data, you put it through
a zip programme, which is the encoder, and then it
NOTE CONF
produces .zip file.
That's the encoded data, right?
NOTE CONF
Now, if you ever try to read a .zip file,
I, I mean, these days, computers are fairly sophisticated, but
NOTE CONF
if you ever try to read it in a plain
as key editor, So usually these editors are smart, it's
NOTE CONF
recognising it's a zip file, so it uncompresses it and
shows you what's, what, what's in that zip file as
NOTE CONF
if it's a natural language.
But if you actually opened a zip file in something
NOTE CONF
like an Emacs or VIM.
Uh, those kind of, uh, ASI editors or Notepad.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if Notepad is, I don't use Windows,
so if you open it a standard editor, you will
NOTE CONF
see gibberish, right?
Have you ever seen when you try to open a
NOTE CONF
zip file, some gibberish comes up and Now, that is
encoded form of data.
NOTE CONF
We'll see why we see gibberish in a bit.
And then once you take that zip file and put
NOTE CONF
it into an unzip command of uh G G unzip
or unzip command, that's the decoder that gets back to
NOTE CONF
original data lossless compression implies that, well, you don't have
to be doing this on the same computer.
NOTE CONF
You could be gene you one the encoding part generates
the encoded data of the original data.
NOTE CONF
You could ship it off to millions of miles and
Um, as, um, if you're seeing some, if, if millions
NOTE CONF
of miles, not literally, but at least anywhere, you can
actually do, do transmission, radio transmissions, um, that have happened
NOTE CONF
between, um, space probes and Earth, for instance, but if
they, they use loss, lossy compressions by, by necessity.
NOTE CONF
But if you were sending it across to some other
place, the encoded data, when you unzip it.
NOTE CONF
You kind of get the original data.
That's the lossless part.
NOTE CONF
You you get what the original encoder encoded.
The transmitter encoded something.
NOTE CONF
It is lossless if the receiver gets back exactly the
same data that you've encoded.
NOTE CONF
Does it make sense now?
If That's the case, then.
NOTE CONF
We never had to even worry about um compression, or
at least we didn't consciously worry about compression, because our
NOTE CONF
view of compression was somehow always fixed with on a
computer, at least when we saw, when we talked about
NOTE CONF
codes, we kind of thought, or we usually take this,
take it for granted that each.
NOTE CONF
Symbols, code word.
When you say as key small a, well, it has
NOTE CONF
a code which is an integer 97 and 97 would
fit into 8 bits, OK?
NOTE CONF
So you can put an ASCII code which is fixed
with any letter, American Standard code for information interchange, one
NOTE CONF
of the earliest codes on computers that, that arose.
Well, basically, um, Assign uh an integer and that integer
NOTE CONF
is stored on a fixed thing.
So when you have a fixed width, a plain text
NOTE CONF
file, a plain text implies a fixed width text file
you open in the editor, you see some rendering of
NOTE CONF
the integer into a character, uh, symbol, and then you
read that file as you would.
NOTE CONF
And it's really convenient to encode and decode because everything
is fixed with it.
NOTE CONF
So you can encode it by saying, what does this
symbol mean?
NOTE CONF
uh, what integer is it, and the integer is this,
it takes these many bits, and then, um, you would,
NOTE CONF
then you kind of take the, um, uh, the encoded
data, read.
NOTE CONF
Left to right, um, the, um, 8 bits at a
time and convert it back to whatever symbols.
NOTE CONF
So you need 11, index that takes a character and
converts into an integer.
NOTE CONF
You need another, uh, index that takes the integer converts
back into a character, right?
NOTE CONF
So you need an inverted index, indexes to be able
to Invert that process and it's fairly convenient to encode
NOTE CONF
and decode.
When I say encode and decode, I mean to put
NOTE CONF
them on a computer as bits that you, it eventually
when you write a file, it's being stored in bits.
NOTE CONF
It's being read as bits and rendered as whatever text
in whatever language that we see.
NOTE CONF
So encoding and decoding for you should be the code
word for binary streams, bit streams.
NOTE CONF
So you're generate encoding in the process of generating a
series of bits.
NOTE CONF
Decoding is reading the series of bits and converting it
back to whatever.
NOTE CONF
So for instance, behind this uh PDF would be a
PDF file which will be in bits and the software
NOTE CONF
is rendering it into whatever form that you see.
Now Now, there is a problem that when you talk
NOTE CONF
about fixed length code words, we're really trying to assume
that all Characters that we are encoding are of the
NOTE CONF
same probability.
Now, why, why that does that, how does probability come
NOTE CONF
into, into the picture?
Now, this is a famous result by Shannon.
NOTE CONF
It is the result saying that if you have any
event, Whose probability is P.
NOTE CONF
I'll go to the board very quickly.
So if you have any event E, And the probability
NOTE CONF
of that event is P.
Then the information content, Shannon's information content of that event
NOTE CONF
is negative log of that probability.
Now, one way to interpret this is, if I asked
NOTE CONF
you, If I did through A series of die rolls,
ad, a dice, let's say a dice contains 6 faces,
NOTE CONF
a cube, and has 1123456 dots on the, on it.
You roll it, it gives you a number, you plot
NOTE CONF
it.
Let's say that you had a bunch of, or maybe
NOTE CONF
let's take it, make it simple.
Maybe it's a coin, coin is much better.
NOTE CONF
If you have a coin, has heads and tails, if
I do.
NOTE CONF
100 coin tosses, it gives me 100, a sequence of
100 heads and tails.
NOTE CONF
How many bits do I need to store that?
How many bits do I need to store?
NOTE CONF
I mean, just as a computer problem rather than how
it's actually done on a computer, but if you have
NOTE CONF
a puzzle, if you have, how much, if I have
100 heads and tails, how many um how many bits
NOTE CONF
do I really need to store it?
Yes sir.
NOTE CONF
100 bits.
Why did you say it was 100 bits, sir?
NOTE CONF
It's a binary, so very good.
So you can map head to 0 and tail to
NOTE CONF
1, and then you can say every time I see
a head, I'll say a 0, and every time I
NOTE CONF
see a 1, tail I see a 1, and whatever,
vice versa, it doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Now, when you're saying that, you're implicitly assuming that the
coin is unbiased, meaning that the probability is 1.
NOTE CONF
Now, this formula is negative log of the probability.
It's stated in natural log.
NOTE CONF
If I want to do it on a computer, it
is log 2.
NOTE CONF
The base of the logarithm doesn't matter.
So if the probability is 12, what is negative log
NOTE CONF
2 of 12?
So, you kind of are trying to, that's negative log
NOTE CONF
of 12.
So that's negative log.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if you take, take that negative of negative of
log 2, log 2 to the base 2 is 1,
NOTE CONF
which is 1 bit.
Now, if, if I were, because we're humans, uh, we
NOTE CONF
kind of like binary computers, but there was a point
when Russians developed binary computers where information is stored as
NOTE CONF
a trick, not a bit.
So base is irrelevant.
NOTE CONF
If you're human beings like natural language, you would say
base 10.
NOTE CONF
It is uh Hartley or a dick, or if you're
a natural, a person like me, I'll make a joke
NOTE CONF
here, a person like me who likes natural logarithm, you
can say it innits.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So, um, joke didn't land well.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, um, um, so it turns out that when
you're doing compression, maybe another joke, it's the art of
NOTE CONF
nitpicking.
Um, you'll have to want to make, squeeze the knits
NOTE CONF
sort of, um, or bits sort of, out of it.
So, but the idea would be that you have, um,
NOTE CONF
you have these uh uh code words with probabilities and
so when you have a fixed code like a one
NOTE CONF
bit for a die, die, uh sorry one bit for
a coin toss, you're basically assuming that they're all of
NOTE CONF
the equal probability, but there's no reason why coins are
Most coins are likely unbiased, but I could have a
NOTE CONF
coin that has a probability of head to be 0.8,
and probability of tail to be 0.2.
NOTE CONF
And if I'm generating a sequence, I'm going to see
a lot more heads.
NOTE CONF
On average, around 80 out of 100 100 of my
coin tosses would be heads and 20 would be tails,
NOTE CONF
if you, not exactly, but on average.
And then if that's the case, then if I'm using
NOTE CONF
one bit per thing, I seem to be making a
poor choice of my code because that code one bit
NOTE CONF
will be efficient if the coin.
was unbiased, it won't be efficient if it is, um,
NOTE CONF
if it's biassed.
And most of the data that we have is not
NOTE CONF
purely random.
So English language, when you write a lot of repetitive
NOTE CONF
patterns.
If you're submitting assignments, a lot of repetitive patterns.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, just joking.
Um, Ha ha.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so, um, so if we have this ASCII code,
we're assuming that the symbol set is over, well, this
NOTE CONF
is actually a 7-bit ASI here, but let's assume that's
in the table was extended ASI, which is 8 bit.
NOTE CONF
So you have 0 to 127 numbers in the uh
going um wrapped in on the, onto the slide.
NOTE CONF
So 0 to 31, 32 to 63, and so on.
And their codes associated with it.
NOTE CONF
We're assuming that all these letters are equally likely when
you have a fixed with code, which is kind of
NOTE CONF
a bit daft if you think about it in real
in reality that's not the case.
NOTE CONF
But I said we really use that because it's very
convenient.
NOTE CONF
It's convenient in, in the plain text form when nothing
else is a constraint.
NOTE CONF
Well, have memory, I have space.
I can use uh be, uh, put some profligacy in
NOTE CONF
my representations, and then, yeah, they kind of have some,
uh, some.
NOTE CONF
Uh, redundancy in my, the way I'm, I'm encoding the
data, that's, that's what you live with.
NOTE CONF
But in reality, you'd want to vary the number of
bits based on the underlying frequencies or probabilities of the
NOTE CONF
symbols that you see.
So most compression starts by saying, I want to model
NOTE CONF
the probability of the of the symbols in the data
that I see, OK?
NOTE CONF
Well, what, what happens when you do that modelling, it
takes more effort to encode to find the best way
NOTE CONF
to encode it and the best way of, uh, to
decode it.
NOTE CONF
And let's see how the idea started, but this variable
in encoding is was there even before digital computing, um.
NOTE CONF
So, well, Morse code, you can say that.
dash is a digit a notion of a bit, right?
NOTE CONF
So, so you can have codes associated with uh Um,
so Morse code looks like this.
NOTE CONF
So when you say, um, uh, uh, so going left
on a binary tree would be a dot going right
NOTE CONF
on the, uh, on a, on a, on a node
of a binary tree would be left.
NOTE CONF
So, there's a binary tree going left is a dot,
going right is a dash.
NOTE CONF
So if you have an A, I don't know.
Some people know about Morse code, but if there's an
NOTE CONF
A, I have to go left, I have to go
right.
NOTE CONF
So A is basically dash in the tree.
If it's W, go left, right, right, so W would
NOTE CONF
be something like, um, and so on.
So, uh, and if, if you take one example, a
NOTE CONF
C here, it's.
Dasht so C would be and these things have been
NOTE CONF
hand curated by someone who or the uh logistics uh
in military logistics they said well if I'm transmitting this
NOTE CONF
on a um on a telegraphic signal then you can
need this dot dashes in ways where if I'm sending
NOTE CONF
uh an English text.
Uh, somehow they should model the frequencies of letters in
NOTE CONF
the, um, in the English alphabet, OK, or the alphabet
that they considered.
NOTE CONF
So this became standardised, uh, around World War One, it's
so long, more than a century ago.
NOTE CONF
Or even much before that actually.
So, um, and yeah, so that's what a code is
NOTE CONF
a variable length code.
So you can see that some codes E has just
NOTE CONF
one sort of event dot and let's say a 0
would have uh a lot of things it turns out
NOTE CONF
in in this case.
So.
NOTE CONF
So that's sort of a variable length encoding.
Now, in English language, you would see E is the
NOTE CONF
most, I mean it depends on the text, but E
is the most frequent letter and let's say Z is
NOTE CONF
the most infrequent one, at least in this, um, uh,
table that we see.
NOTE CONF
Now what you want to do is if you want
to compress an English text, you want to assign a
NOTE CONF
short code for something that appears a lot of times.
And a longer code for something that is infrequent.
NOTE CONF
So the idea would be that because the frequent one
appears more number of times if I assign a shorter
NOTE CONF
code, even if an infrequent one appears, it appears rarely.
I can afford to have a longer code for it.
NOTE CONF
So there's sort of a trade-off between frequency and the
code length that you do.
NOTE CONF
It's sort of embedding the idea of Sharon's information.
So can I sort of get.
NOTE CONF
Close to that lower bound that Shannon has has provided.
So, now, but if you can't simply, well, if that
NOTE CONF
was the that was the issue, I can quickly come
up with a code, which is a variable length without
NOTE CONF
much ado.
But it creating these variable length codes requires some amount
NOTE CONF
of attention.
Now let's take see why this is a problem.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you have a code 0 for A, 1
for B, 10 for C, and 101 for D.
NOTE CONF
I've Assign the code for four letters.
If I want to encode the letters BA BA, B
NOTE CONF
is 1, A is 0, B is 1, A is
0, so 1010 is my encoded stream, so clearly that
NOTE CONF
leads to ambiguities, isn't it?
So I can decode it as it was originally intended
NOTE CONF
or I could have decoded it like that, 1010 where
I would interpret 10 as a C rather than A
NOTE CONF
B and an A, right?
Uh, or I could have done it like 101.
NOTE CONF
Um, so they sort of we introduce com uh spaces,
because we kind of are partitioning visually, we see that
NOTE CONF
the spaces, but if you're a communication channel, there's a
state which is zero or 1, you have to, there's
NOTE CONF
a continuous stream of bits, you will, there's no.
Space right it's in a zero state or a one
NOTE CONF
state in which you are communicating, so you need to
sort of tell where a variable code you should you
NOTE CONF
need to be able to tell or design a coding
scheme where you know where it starts.
NOTE CONF
Each code starts and each code ends, OK.
That kind of tells you why you're seeing gibberish when
NOTE CONF
you open a .zip file in a plain text editor.
That's because you're interpreting what is variable length as a
NOTE CONF
fixed length code, and it'll, the fixed length code associated
with the variable length code will be showing some random
NOTE CONF
8 bits at a time.
So it's taking, grouping the bit stream into fixed width
NOTE CONF
and whatever the symbol you're rendering, it's clearly it's got
nothing to do with the sim.
NOTE CONF
The symbol that you're rendering, so you'll see gibberish in
your editors, yeah.
NOTE CONF
However, there is this code, if I designed it in
a certain special properties, is decodable.
NOTE CONF
So if I had 0 for A, 10 for B,
0, 110 for C, and 111 for uh D, um,
NOTE CONF
if I had Let's say the text only had A
and B's and I had to encode it as 100,100.
NOTE CONF
It is uniquely decodable.
Now, what about this code?
NOTE CONF
Makes it uniquely decodable.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
No cohort is the procedure.
No code word is a prefix of other.
NOTE CONF
Now I just want to give you a definition of
slight um sort of jargon about, so code is for,
NOTE CONF
is a collection of code words.
A code is like a book.
NOTE CONF
Uh, a dictionary and code word is the words in
the dictionary, right?
NOTE CONF
So, so what you're trying to um do is you
create a code for a set of symbols, and each
NOTE CONF
symbol will have a code word, and the suggestion of
why this is uniquely decodable is because no code word
NOTE CONF
was a prefix of another code word.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
So let's take um.
Uh, A is A a prefix of any of the
NOTE CONF
other ones?
Is B a prefix of any of the other ones?
NOTE CONF
Is C a prefix of any of the other ones?
So when you have this property, it's called a prefix-free
NOTE CONF
code, which somehow in the literature, the free is dropped
and they call it prefix codes.
NOTE CONF
But when you see a prefix code, you're actually meaning
it's a prefix-free code, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, they're also called instantaneous codes, and this, this is
beautiful um ocean of uh computer science here.
NOTE CONF
We will try and explore this.
So now what's my agenda?
NOTE CONF
The agenda is to first introduce.
If you have a a text.
NOTE CONF
How do you encode, how do you come up with
a prefix-free code for each character in the text?
NOTE CONF
OK.
So first thing that I'm going to show you, it's
NOTE CONF
a very simple algorithm.
How do you, how do you find prefix-free codes for
NOTE CONF
Each character that that is observed in the text, the
text is given to you, I construct a prefix-free code,
NOTE CONF
variable length from it based on the underlying frequencies.
Now, after that, I will show you if an integer
NOTE CONF
is given, obviously.
We have a code over text, but what if, what
NOTE CONF
if, what if our object was not a we're not
treating stuff as characters, but as an integer, I'll give
NOTE CONF
you a prefix-free code for integers.
Now, these two, a code for um for characters, a
NOTE CONF
code for integers will form the Lego bricks, the building
blocks for you to go and write a.
NOTE CONF
Implement a a fairly easy to understand but quite effective
compression algorithm.
NOTE CONF
In fact, you could have, you could use this encoding
scheme that we will be talking about to go and.
NOTE CONF
Go back to week 3 and write your own Burrows-Wheeler
transform zipper, uh uh uh compression programme using Burroughs-Wheeler transform.
NOTE CONF
You could write it to apply on Lempelziv 77 algorithm,
which we'll do at the end, or any other compression
NOTE CONF
scheme that.
Relies on encoding of on one side characters and encoding
NOTE CONF
of integers.
Now remember, both are prefix-free, which means that when you
NOTE CONF
devise these encoding schemes, you will have an algorithm to
decode it.
NOTE CONF
So whatever you encode, you could be able to decode.
And so we'll see how these things kind of come
NOTE CONF
together.
So first ingredient is a prefix-free code now.
NOTE CONF
This is so easy to understand the mechanics that I'll
directly jump into an example that actually comes from Wikipedia.
NOTE CONF
So let's not worry about the text that we saw.
The text is only telling what I'm going to explain.
NOTE CONF
Now let's assume that you have to, you've seen the
text, OK?
NOTE CONF
So the text is coming from Wikipedia.
I mean, so the example had colours and stuff like
NOTE CONF
that.
I didn't want to reuse the same um example there's
NOTE CONF
when something is working so well.
Now, what I then do is.
NOTE CONF
When you have this sort of, uh, so I've replaced
spaces with underscore just so that you know there's a
NOTE CONF
space.
Otherwise if you had a space, it would be an
NOTE CONF
AI 32, I think 32 is a space if from
memory.
NOTE CONF
So integer code for uh ask ask for a space
would be 32.
NOTE CONF
So you see a plain text, uh thing and you
will see that the colours here, the colours tell you
NOTE CONF
different.
Um, distinct characters.
NOTE CONF
So if I bring out that next slide, the claim
is you've seen reds twice, you've seen, uh, B's or
NOTE CONF
uh C's twice.
Uh, purple be 6 times and so on.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Can you sort of just eyeball and see that's sort
NOTE CONF
of consistent.
Uh, it's from Wikipedia, so that's unlikely they'll make, there'll
NOTE CONF
be errors.
If they were, the people would have picked it up
NOTE CONF
earlier.
Um, all right, so if you have this now, these
NOTE CONF
are the frequencies.
So what did I suggest we should do?
NOTE CONF
The idea would be to make the most infrequent one,
the longest possible code, at least the longer the code,
NOTE CONF
the more infrequent it should be, or the shorter the
code, the more frequent it should be.
NOTE CONF
So you'd want to sort of, it's sorted in the
from the infrequent to the frequent order.
NOTE CONF
So symbol 1, frequency 2, symbol 2, frequency 6, symbol
3, frequency 7.
NOTE CONF
So I can do that just by scanning and counting
each of these letters, and that's what I end up
NOTE CONF
getting.
The algorithm is a greedy algorithm, which is an optimal
NOTE CONF
greedy algorithm.
We'll first go through the algorithm and we'll talk about
NOTE CONF
why that optimality holds.
So first thing it's doing is take 2.
NOTE CONF
Infrequent symbols, the, the least frequent symbols.
So take the least two infrequent symbols, in which case
NOTE CONF
it is C and B.
And now the goal is to form a binary tree.
NOTE CONF
I must say the binary tree will have the symbols,
the uh the symbols that you are encoding at the
NOTE CONF
leaves, and you're constructing a binary tree over those leaves.
So and you start by taking two least frequent symbols,
NOTE CONF
C and B, and I construct.
A merged symbol.
NOTE CONF
That contains both C and B.
So this is basically the first step of your my
NOTE CONF
binary tree is going upwards towards the, so from leaf
or uh towards the root, uh towards the root.
NOTE CONF
So here, I've used the two least frequent symbols, C
and B.
NOTE CONF
And I constructed a tree where it is rooted on
a special symbol which is a merging of these two,
NOTE CONF
so it's a set of C's and B's below it.
So whatever, whenever you merge something, that merge thing will
NOTE CONF
contain everything below it.
Below it is C on the left and B on
NOTE CONF
the right.
Now as a convention, you can use that, you can
NOTE CONF
use this, this um idea as a convention that.
The lesser of the two, the most infrequent of the
NOTE CONF
two letters that you merge would be on the left
and the other one would be on the right.
NOTE CONF
So of C and B, C appears 2 times, B
appears 6 times, so 2 and 6 is the frequency
NOTE CONF
here.
So this root node will have a left child which
NOTE CONF
is C.
And the right childhood is B, and if both the
NOTE CONF
frequencies are the same, you can make a choice arbitrarily,
no harm.
NOTE CONF
There's no reason why you can't swap the order, it's
just a matter of convention, OK?
NOTE CONF
And we'll see why this is still optimal when the
way we're doing it.
NOTE CONF
So we're greedily choosing the two least and merged it.
Now, once I merged it.
NOTE CONF
Once I merge C and B into a set CB,
I will forget about CBs independently and try to see
NOTE CONF
it as a single symbol, a new symbol, which is
a merging of C and B.
NOTE CONF
OK, so let's actually see, let's actually view if I
push the C and B into this set.
NOTE CONF
Ignoring C and D independently, now I have a symbol
set which is again ordered in the least frequent to
NOTE CONF
the most frequent.
So previously, if I combine CBs, how many C's did
NOTE CONF
I see?
Um, did I view?
NOTE CONF
I, I, I, I saw 2 C's and 6 B's.
So 6 plus 2 would be 8.
NOTE CONF
The frequencies of C or B's is 8.
So if I push back this new symbol.
NOTE CONF
Which is, which is a designate for the combination of
C and B into this list, it will have to
NOTE CONF
follow E.
E is appearing 7 times, C or B is appearing
NOTE CONF
8 times, space is appearing 10 times, and so on.
Is the Steps clear so far.
NOTE CONF
It's there's nothing smart at all here.
Now then I rinse, repeat the process.
NOTE CONF
Take the two least frequent symbols in my set.
Now this set, by the way, this set was, how
NOTE CONF
long was it?
Let's say that it was 123456.
NOTE CONF
This would be of size 5, right?
So it'll have, if this is of size and this
NOTE CONF
will be of size N minus 1.
Yeah, that's always going to be the case because you
NOTE CONF
merge two into one.
So you, you, the size, the symbol set reduces by
NOTE CONF
1.
Now The least too frequent are E, which is 7,
NOTE CONF
and CB, which is COB, which is 8.
Now, I can then merge E and CB into.
NOTE CONF
Into a um into a tree, into a binary tree.
So if you don't forget about everything below E or
NOTE CONF
COB would be the parent node because E was smaller
of the two, it goes left, CB was larger of
NOTE CONF
the two, it goes right, but CB was already had
a structure previously, so that structure is basically being borrowed
NOTE CONF
over, does it?
So if you ignore everything below this bit.
NOTE CONF
I, I don't think they have repaired this.
I'm pretty sure.
NOTE CONF
I can't seem to scribble ever.
Now, this doesn't work.
NOTE CONF
So, You'll have to make do with my, um, so
if, if you, if you look at this merge node
NOTE CONF
and left and right child, you can think of ECB
to be the merge node and E to be the
NOTE CONF
left and CB to the to be the right child,
but CB was previously merged, so that's why you're seeing
NOTE CONF
that structure here, OK?
Do you see what, what I've done there?
NOTE CONF
Now I do the same process.
Now I know that E appears 7 times and C
NOTE CONF
or B appears 8 times, so 7 + 8 is
15.
NOTE CONF
So E or C or B will have to appear
15 times.
NOTE CONF
Now my special symbol is E or C or B,
ECB, and then I push it into this list.
NOTE CONF
Into its place in the sorted order of the frequencies
1010, 1115, so 15 has to be at the bottom,
NOTE CONF
and then I do the same process.
Now previously at 6 here you're at 5, now you
NOTE CONF
have 4 here, so it's reducing by 1, yeah, this,
this problem has reduced at every iteration by.
NOTE CONF
It is handling one fewer symbol than previously, yeah.
So now if I have this set, if I take
NOTE CONF
the two least frequent, merge it, it turns out both
are of the same frequency, it doesn't matter which goes
NOTE CONF
where you can.
Uh, you can break the tie by choosing any one
NOTE CONF
of them here.
Space or underscore goes left and D goes right.
NOTE CONF
There are 10 times you've seen an underscore or space,
so we're using underscore as a proxy for space, and
NOTE CONF
D has seen 10 times.
So underscore or D is, is observed 20 times, 10
NOTE CONF
+ 10.
And you repeat this process 20 times it goes and
NOTE CONF
goes into this list again sorted.
So now 6543.
NOTE CONF
Now in this iteration you would be merging the least
two frequent which happens to be to be A or
NOTE CONF
E or CO B and so A goes to the
left, E or CO B goes to the right because
NOTE CONF
of the frequencies, and then, but ECB already had the
structure, so that structure is what you're seeing here.
NOTE CONF
And then you repeat this process.
So to combine 15 plus 11 is 26, insert it.
NOTE CONF
So you become now a tree of um so you
have two more letters to process and when you combine
NOTE CONF
them, you would basically end up getting a root node
that contains all the letters that you've seen in the
NOTE CONF
text.
The root node represents everything below.
NOTE CONF
Everything below would be all letters, all the letters of
the leaves.
NOTE CONF
So if you can see.
All the letters underscore D A E C B, they
NOTE CONF
are the leaves of the binary tree.
It's called a strict binary tree because every internal node
NOTE CONF
has exactly 2 children.
OK?
NOTE CONF
Every internal node will have exactly 2 children because that's
how you merge them, right?
NOTE CONF
You create an internal node with left and right because
you're merging it.
NOTE CONF
So if you did that, then my claim is I
have a prefix-free code.
NOTE CONF
Does someone want to tell me what, why there's a
prefix-free code implicit in a binary tree?
NOTE CONF
Does anyone want to go, have a go at it?
See the zeros and ones?
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Right Exactly, so when you say combined edges, you mean
NOTE CONF
a traversal, isn't it?
So if you traverse from the root to a leaf,
NOTE CONF
any leaf, it spells out a a binary code word,
right?
NOTE CONF
So root, go left, left, 00 is a code for
underscore.
NOTE CONF
Go left, right is a code for D.
Right, left of the code for A, right, right, left
NOTE CONF
of the code for E.
Right, right, right, left to the code for C, right,
NOTE CONF
right, right, right, right is the code for B.
So if you interpret left as 0 and right as
NOTE CONF
1, I have a binary stream.
Why is it, why is it prefix 3?
NOTE CONF
Because each room has exactly 2 children.
The I think I know you're getting there, but why,
NOTE CONF
why exactly?
So what, yeah, Essa.
NOTE CONF
Um, like none of the characters have any children, so,
so like.
NOTE CONF
Like the final symbol, if a final symbol had a
child, that would be a prefix of um what the
NOTE CONF
next one would be, but since every single symbol is
a leaf, it can never go further beyond that, therefore.
NOTE CONF
I, I think both, I think the ideas are overlap
for.
NOTE CONF
So every code word is a path from root to
a leaf.
NOTE CONF
You can never find another leaf in the path from
root to a leaf.
NOTE CONF
For it to be a prefix of another, if if
one code word is a prefix of another, you would
NOTE CONF
have to find two leaves in a path from a
root to a leaf.
NOTE CONF
Can you ever see two leaves in a path from
a root to a leaf?
NOTE CONF
It's not possible because it's a binary tree, because it
has internal two nodes, and it's because of the structure
NOTE CONF
that you just said.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
So I wasn't Understating that this is very easy to
understand, it's actually very easy to understand.
NOTE CONF
So that's the code words, and then if I did
nothing else, so this is not compression, yes, this is
NOTE CONF
encoding of each character.
As a prefix-free code, but that itself is, seems to
NOTE CONF
be that is not all the story of compression.
You can, you get more, you have more repetition than
NOTE CONF
just than just letters in the text.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Words can repeat, phrases can repeat, whole code blocks can
repeat in assignments.
NOTE CONF
So, so there are a lot, lot, lot, lot of,
uh, compression, sorry, I'm just having fun, that's all.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I, so if I have, um, if
I have.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the encoding of these letters into the, so if
I use the, um, the code, the variable length codes.
NOTE CONF
Now, by the way, just eyeball this that it turns
out that there is a correlation between the frequencies, not
NOTE CONF
Not exactly as you would have expected in some strict
ordering, but you will see that frequent terms seem to
NOTE CONF
be shorter.
Compared to, so A, D, and uh space, A, D,
NOTE CONF
and space, they seem to have the same code length
in this manifestation, but they are the most frequent ones,
NOTE CONF
the shot and they're short.
In fact, the length of the code, what's the length
NOTE CONF
of.
Space is 2 bits, length of D is 2 bits,
NOTE CONF
length of A is 2 bits.
So all these things have, because they had a frequencies
NOTE CONF
of 11 or 10, they seem to have had the
same number of bits.
NOTE CONF
E had 3 bits associated with it, which is slightly
less frequent.
NOTE CONF
C and B are the most um infrequent ones, and
they've been assigned a longer code word, right?
NOTE CONF
And if I just map.
This string into its corresponding code words, the colours will
NOTE CONF
tell you that.
It's a bit it's a bit encoding of each character
NOTE CONF
using its Huffman code word or an Huffman code constructed
on the frequencies observed in the text of those characters.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So.
NOTE CONF
So when you are, by the way, when you are
representing, if you did nothing else, it would still give
NOTE CONF
you com it's still compression and 8 bits per character,
right?
NOTE CONF
So can clearly, none of these things are 8 bits.
So if you're representing the string in a file, If
NOTE CONF
you wrote it as a flat text file, it would
be the length of this text times 8.
NOTE CONF
OK.
But if you are using uh the Huffman code, what
NOTE CONF
you would be doing is every 8 bits, you're packing
these bits into bytes, every 8 bits would be containing
NOTE CONF
Um, so if you look at, think of that to
be a bit stream, you are packing 8 bits until
NOTE CONF
the stream ends, and if the stream ends with, with,
which is not a perfect, if this is not a
NOTE CONF
perfect multiple of 8, you pad 0s at the end,
OK?
NOTE CONF
It is, we'll figure out how to decode this and
all that, I mean, decode uh properly later on.
NOTE CONF
But if, let's assume that you had, you were given
this stream to read.
NOTE CONF
I know I showed you how to encode it.
Now I claim that it is easy to decode this.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone have ideas?
Anyone who has not yet answered, how do you decode
NOTE CONF
it?
Those who have not yet answered the question.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
you would have Fantastic.
NOTE CONF
the fantastic.
OK, let's actually do this.
NOTE CONF
So the, the suggestion is that you should have the
tree structure, that's the first important thing.
NOTE CONF
It is decodable only with the information of the code,
and the code either is presented in this form, if
NOTE CONF
it's presented in this form, I can convert that into
a tree myself, yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can actually, the tree structure is already in the
code.
NOTE CONF
So you can take these, if somebody gave you this
information, then you can construct this tree, think about that
NOTE CONF
in your self-study, but if the tree is there, then
your suggestion was go from left to right, starting with
NOTE CONF
this uh tree, and then what do we do?
So first is one, what do you do?
NOTE CONF
Um.
You go to the next So Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, first, so first you're at the root, you see
a one, then the suggestion might be that you would
NOTE CONF
go right.
And then you see a 0.
NOTE CONF
You were here, you go left and you saw a
0.
NOTE CONF
The moment you see a leaf, spit out the letter
associated with that.
NOTE CONF
So that 10 will that process of going from root
down to the leaf will spit out spit out an
NOTE CONF
a in this case because 10 is a and then
the fact the moment you get to the leaf, you
NOTE CONF
reset your pointer back to the root and repeat the
process.
NOTE CONF
00, so 00, again, you got to a leaf, spit
out a space because 00 is a space.
NOTE CONF
Then reset the pointer to the root.
01 is a D, so that's the D, then spit
NOTE CONF
out a D, then 110, so you keep reading one
bit at a time, so 11, so you keep reading,
NOTE CONF
0.
Well, once you have come to the leaf, you spit
NOTE CONF
out an E and you're repeating this process and the
whole string is decodable.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Any questions for this, about this?
NOTE CONF
OK.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
to that So if, if you have this binary string,
you can start with a root, empty root node.
NOTE CONF
It says 00 is underscore.
So insert, um you can insert explicit trees building if
NOTE CONF
you want to build an explicit tree, left, 0 means
left.
NOTE CONF
So go left, create a node.
Another 0, go left and there's nothing more, so that
NOTE CONF
will be a leaf node and that'll be labelled underscore.
Then go back to the next one.
NOTE CONF
Next character is 01, so go or if 0, if
the node path already exists, go down.
NOTE CONF
1 doesn't exist, so branch out to the right, create,
created.
NOTE CONF
So you're essentially creating the tree by just reading the
bit stream.
NOTE CONF
Does that clarify the idea?
Yeah, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
I created.
Like is that tree always like created from scratch, like
NOTE CONF
what you said or?
Sometimes they're just like a stored tree.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you could actually, so good question, so you
can actually um have a header which essentially stores the
NOTE CONF
tree rather than the code.
So there are two equivalent forms of doing the same
NOTE CONF
thing.
It's just the matter of if, if it is basically
NOTE CONF
a stored tree, it is, you can, any binary tree
can be encoded in the structure of the binary tree
NOTE CONF
can be encoded as bits.
Just by left right traversal.
NOTE CONF
So rather than have the code itself, you could essentially
store the structure of the tree and then some labels
NOTE CONF
associated with it.
So there are some.
NOTE CONF
Extra stuff that you have to do, but that's perfectly
fine.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I don't think there is a must do this, uh,
NOTE CONF
here.
Both are equivalently storing the information.
NOTE CONF
I don't think um it would be uh if you're
not worried about um the extra bits to take to
NOTE CONF
store the tree, and often the character set is very
small anyway, you don't have to worry about um storing
NOTE CONF
it explicitly as code words, but if you just store
the code words, it'll be shortest.
NOTE CONF
If the goal is compression and if you're doing the
competition on compression, you want to squeeze every single bit
NOTE CONF
of out of it.
So there are some nuances there.
NOTE CONF
OK, so everything I said has been sort of communicated
encoding and decoding.
NOTE CONF
Is there any, are there any questions before we go
to, so I've already told you that it is um
NOTE CONF
It is, um Uh, the algorithm, I will, the next
slide shows you why this is optimal, but I will
NOTE CONF
want to finish the business end.
It's a very simple slide.
NOTE CONF
It's like it looks more complicated.
Why is greed good?
NOTE CONF
By the way, this greedy choice being optimal, did you
come across any other algorithm in 2004 where greedy choices
NOTE CONF
were optimal?
Crascals, rims, yeah, there are many times, right?
NOTE CONF
So this is basically one of those algorithms where you're
doing it.
NOTE CONF
Now, we'll, we'll cross this, uh, thing later on because
I just want to go through the mechanics first and
NOTE CONF
then come back to the theory.
Just reorder the way it's done.
NOTE CONF
So we'll have, don't worry about, um, uh, understanding the
optimality at at the at straightaway.
NOTE CONF
So I'll come back to it.
Don't worry.
NOTE CONF
Now, in, uh, so in the worst case, I'll record
something and, and post it if you run out of
NOTE CONF
time.
But I'm more, I don't want to run out of
NOTE CONF
time explaining the algorithm, which is much more fun.
So Now What I want to do is have an
NOTE CONF
encoding scheme for integers.
And when I mean integers, I don't mean characters of
NOTE CONF
integers.
I mean encode integers.
NOTE CONF
Encode integers 1234, all the positive integers, so I'm just
going to write this as.
NOTE CONF
So I want to encode.
N E N in the.
NOTE CONF
Positive integer set.
So basically, 123.
NOTE CONF
Dot dot dot.
OK, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, For those who are relying on recording, it is
your fault if you don't come here.
NOTE CONF
So encode any um In positive integer set, 123, all
the way to infinity.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going into the notions of countable sets
and uncountable sets, but perhaps I have to talk about
NOTE CONF
it.
So my, my claim is that if I have a
NOTE CONF
code over For all any possible integer in the set.
And it is variable length prefix free.
NOTE CONF
If I gave you a code.
The claim is that you could use the same code
NOTE CONF
to encode.
All natural numbers.
NOTE CONF
Please don't argue with me why 0 is a natural
number.
NOTE CONF
Um Then you can also store the entire um Z,
which is Minus infinity.
NOTE CONF
-2 -10123 plus infinity.
So you can, if I have a code for this,
NOTE CONF
I can do for these two, because there's a 1
to 1 mapping between those two sets.
NOTE CONF
They're both, they're all countable sets.
Now, how do I, to give you a sense of
NOTE CONF
how do I go from here to here, I can,
if I know a code word for this, I can
NOTE CONF
map it to 0, I can map this code word
to 12.
NOTE CONF
And this process will go, if you, if you're believing
that the integers start from zero and not from 1,
NOTE CONF
that's, you can map it.
Now, I can also map this to this set.
NOTE CONF
In fact, I can, I can.
Use a mapping which 140, 2 to -1, 3 +1,
NOTE CONF
4 -2, 5 +2, all the way to um, Infinity
and beyond, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I can do, do these things.
So we will essentially try and say, how do you
NOTE CONF
encode it?
I'm going to explain the encoding on the board.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to deviate from the slides.
Slides will serve as your reference material.
NOTE CONF
Um, So my goal is to give any integer to
be able to come up with that code.
NOTE CONF
So does Now why can't I use binary of any
number?
NOTE CONF
It's a binary representation of any number of prefix-free code.
It's variable length, surely.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So if, so that's the, if you take the minimal
NOTE CONF
binary representation of any number, it is a variable length.
It's of variable length.
NOTE CONF
So 1 is 12 is 10, OK, 1 extra bit.
3 is 11, 4 is 100, 5 is 101, and
NOTE CONF
so on, right?
So when I talk about binary representation, I mean minimal
NOTE CONF
binary representation.
Minimal binary representation implies that you don't want to like
NOTE CONF
the fixed with code.
You're padding a lot of zeros on the most significant
NOTE CONF
bit side because they don't have any meaning.
You're padding so many zeros so as to make up
NOTE CONF
that integers.
So if you have, let's say 500 and is that
NOTE CONF
561?
Yeah, 561.
NOTE CONF
If 561 The minimal binary representation is 1000110001 from the
high to low, so 10 bits, 0 to 9, the
NOTE CONF
most significant bit is of the order of 9, yeah,
2 to the power of 9.
NOTE CONF
So you can.
Does it make sense?
NOTE CONF
OK.
So, 512 + 32 + 16 + 1 is what
NOTE CONF
it's saying.
561 is 512 + 32 + 16 + 1.
NOTE CONF
Ah, it has to be because the court says so.
I mean, I'm not doing it in my head.
NOTE CONF
Um, ah, so.
So, why did I say 512?
NOTE CONF
Because the 9th bit is set, the 5th bit is
set, the 4th bit is set, the 0th bit is
NOTE CONF
set.
So 9th bit is set, if you're converting it into
NOTE CONF
decimals, that's, that's how you're, that's what place value systems
are, right?
NOTE CONF
Um When we moved from the Roman system to this
place value system, and that's what we're doing.
NOTE CONF
It's in binary, that's all we're doing.
Um, OK, so does everyone understand what, why this binary
NOTE CONF
code is this, right?
Now, my, I'm going to use, if I have to,
NOTE CONF
I'm giving you a process where if I have 561.
Is that a prefix-free code?
NOTE CONF
Can I use minimal binary representations as prefix-free codes?
Clearly not, right, so because any prefix is an integer.
NOTE CONF
So I need to construct a prefix-free code for any
integer.
NOTE CONF
So the idea that you, we're going to use is
the following, OK?
NOTE CONF
So I just maybe, so the idea that we're going
to use is that first, I have the binary of.
NOTE CONF
And Whatever number that I'm encoding, yeah, capital N maybe.
We're using capital there, yeah.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So that's, so this will spell out some number of
NOTE CONF
bits.
So 561 was one.
NOTE CONF
0001 10001.
That's what I, that's what I remember from what I
NOTE CONF
just said, right?
So, Y 61 was 10,000, 110001.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so that's 10 bits.
So if 561 was 10 bits, so I will write
NOTE CONF
this here.
1.
NOTE CONF
So that was, how many bits is that?
10.
NOTE CONF
Now in my next As a prefix to this.
I'm going to encode.
NOTE CONF
The binary of the length.
-1.
NOTE CONF
So binary.
Of L1 minus 1.
NOTE CONF
What is L1 is 1010 minus 1 is 9.
I'm just going to give you the mechanics and then
NOTE CONF
we'll reason this.
So 10 minus 1 is 9, so I have to
NOTE CONF
do the binary of 9.
What is the binary of 9?
NOTE CONF
Minimmal binary code of 9.
8 + 1 is 9, so 1001, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
Someone verify this 1001.
So 01 + 2 + 4 + 8.
NOTE CONF
So 8 + 1 is 9.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So, Um, so that would be my code before that.
Now, there's some more that we have to do, but
NOTE CONF
the, the general mechanics is this, how many, what's the
length of this?
NOTE CONF
L2 equals 4.
Now, by doing binary of L1 minus 1, I got
NOTE CONF
the encoding, which gave me the length of L2, L2
is 4.
NOTE CONF
Now I do repeat the process.
It is binary of L2 minus 1.
NOTE CONF
So L2 minus, so that's binary of L2 minus 1.
So binary of L2 minus 1 is binary of 34
NOTE CONF
minus 1 is 3.
So 3 is what?
NOTE CONF
11 That's of length 2.
I do binary of L3 minus whatever I have, um,
NOTE CONF
I've encoded there at the prefix, L3 minus 1 would
be 2, so binary of 2 minus 1 is 1,
NOTE CONF
so 2 minus 1 is 1, binary of 1.
What is binary of 1?
NOTE CONF
One, once you reach the length of some block, which
is one, you stop the process.
NOTE CONF
Now So if I, I, if I claimed something ridiculous,
Which is basically concatenation of all these things.
NOTE CONF
This is, cannot be, you, I can, you'll, you'll swear
at me and say, well, that can't be a prefix-free
NOTE CONF
code because all prefixes of this code is, Is a
binary, a minimal binary, uh, number, so I can, if
NOTE CONF
I just take this, it's 1, that will be 11,
it would be 3, 111 would be 7, 1111 would
NOTE CONF
be 1515, 15, and so on, right?
So, so this can't really be a functional code.
NOTE CONF
Now what you could then do, and this is what
Elias.
NOTE CONF
Um Uh, a very famous information theoretician, he came up
with what was called Omega chord.
NOTE CONF
So, so EIS Omega code was basically said, well, really,
this is my code.
NOTE CONF
This is what the code is.
And I want to make everything before that.
NOTE CONF
In a format that will lead, give me a prefix-free
code that is basically allows me to make the information
NOTE CONF
here prefix-free.
So, this is the code block.
NOTE CONF
This is length block 1, this is length block 2,
this is the length block 3.
NOTE CONF
So code is here, and you have added some blocks
of code in some special way, binary of the length
NOTE CONF
of the code, minus 1, length of the code of
the first length block minus 1 would be the second.
NOTE CONF
Um, length block here, it's my binary of this length
minus 1 is this code here and so on.
NOTE CONF
So, now really, there's a code block and a length
block.
NOTE CONF
When I'm reading this left to right, when I, my
idea would be to be able to distinguish, I know
NOTE CONF
that I stop at 11 bit, and when I'm reading
it, I need to know that this is the code
NOTE CONF
block.
Or a length block.
NOTE CONF
Is this a code block or a length block?
So in which case, I know, if I know the
NOTE CONF
information, if I know that this is a length block,
I start by reading one bit.
NOTE CONF
Let's say I start by, if I know that it
was a length block prior, we'll see how we can
NOTE CONF
trick the system to recognise if it's a code block
or a length block, but I know that my code
NOTE CONF
always, my encoding process always ended with one bit.
So I'll read the first bit.
NOTE CONF
What is the number here?
One, so what would be the decimal of that number?
NOTE CONF
11 in binary, in decimal is also 1.
I know that the next block will be plus 1
NOTE CONF
bits long, whatever I decode here.
Here I've read 1, because I've encoded this as 2
NOTE CONF
minus 1.
If I decode this, plus 1 would be 2.
NOTE CONF
Now, if I knew that this was a length block,
I read the two bits, because I've, this is asking
NOTE CONF
me to read two bits, and it's a length block.
So that is 11, what would be the decimal of
NOTE CONF
that?
3.
NOTE CONF
So which means that the next block would be 4
bits long, so I'll, I know that this block will,
NOTE CONF
I'll read the four bits, and if I knew it
was a length block, I read the four bits is
NOTE CONF
1001.
What is 1001 in decimal?
NOTE CONF
9, that means that the next one would be 1
longer, and I read 1 longer, 9 + 1, 10
NOTE CONF
bits, and if I knew it's a code block, I
can stop that process.
NOTE CONF
Now, how can I change this currently not a prefix-free
code into a prefix-free code which allows me to read.
NOTE CONF
Um, distinguish that one block is a length block and
one block is a code block, and the trick is
NOTE CONF
the following.
I know, look at the most significant bits on.
NOTE CONF
In each block.
With the most significant bit in each block always be
NOTE CONF
one?
Why, why we should always be one?
NOTE CONF
It would, because it's a minimal binary code, right, because
all binary representations are minimal binary representations, which means that
NOTE CONF
if there were zeros onto, you never add zeros on,
you'd never add zeros here, right?
NOTE CONF
So this 0 is unnecessary.
That's the minimal binary representation.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't change the value if you add zeros to
the most significant side.
NOTE CONF
So all of these uh blocks are one.
Can I use the the certainty that all binary codes,
NOTE CONF
minimal binary representation representations start with a one?
Can I use that certainty to flag between a length
NOTE CONF
block and a code block?
So I'll give others a chance, yeah, I'll, I'll come
NOTE CONF
back to you in a bit.
Can you use the fact that these are always one,
NOTE CONF
and somehow trick this encoding to say one is a
length block and one is a code block.
NOTE CONF
It's sort of not hard.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Well, you can have a leading 0.
Um That, that can, that can sort of do, but
NOTE CONF
it's adding one extra bit into it.
Yeah, that's, that can do.
NOTE CONF
I, I, I sort of don't think that's a problem.
There's a small problem in terms of when you encoding
NOTE CONF
um So there's a small corner case problem which we'll
talk about, but uh you had an idea.
NOTE CONF
It So, so all of them.
OK, so it, it, you can do either way.
NOTE CONF
So what, what the suggestion would be that if I
swap this to be zeros.
NOTE CONF
If I just called every length block, least significant bit
zero, if I see a block with the.
NOTE CONF
Uh sorry Uh, I'll say that again.
If I, if I swap the most significant bit of,
NOTE CONF
of the length block to zero, code block is kept
as is.
NOTE CONF
If I swap that to 0, there's no reason why
you could have not done the other way.
NOTE CONF
Perfectly fine, um, but one dispensation is to swap.
The most significant bit of the length block to 0.
NOTE CONF
If you had that as 0, then when I start
my code.
NOTE CONF
I have to read one bit.
And I'll read 0, not 1, right?
NOTE CONF
But I know when I read 0, it is a
length block that I'm reading because it's starting with a
NOTE CONF
0.
So because it is a 0, I can change it
NOTE CONF
back to a 1 in my decoding process.
OK, so let's actually write this this way.
NOTE CONF
So if my code was 0, 01 001, actually, I
will put the zeros where.
NOTE CONF
Um, which correspond to the 001.
001.
NOTE CONF
I'm a missing a 0.
No, it's, it's one.
NOTE CONF
01 100, OK, you're right.
1001.
NOTE CONF
Does that, does that make sense now?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Then it is 1000, 110001.
So if I have the code, which is That, so
NOTE CONF
that that suggests that this was flipped.
You're not storing bits will not tell you.
NOTE CONF
I'm just giving you a visual recognition that this bit
was actually flipped, should have been 1 but have flipped
NOTE CONF
it to 0.
This bit should have been 1 but have flipped it
NOTE CONF
to a 0.
This bit has had to be 1 that I flipped
NOTE CONF
it to a 0.
Now if I have this stream of bits, I can
NOTE CONF
decode it by doing this.
Start by reading the first.
NOTE CONF
Bit, OK.
If I read the first bit, I will read 0,
NOTE CONF
right?
I always have to read one bit at the start.
NOTE CONF
When I read 0, I know it is a length
block because all the length blocks start with a 0,
NOTE CONF
all the code blocks start with a 1.
OK, so it is starting with a 0.
NOTE CONF
So which means that I can change it to a
1.
NOTE CONF
I read 0, but I'll change it to a 1
because it was a length block.
NOTE CONF
I decode the decimal value, so what is a decimal
of one?
NOTE CONF
It is one.
Then, how long would be my next length block would
NOTE CONF
be 1 plus what I have decoded, 1 + 1
is 2.
NOTE CONF
So I will go to the next 2 bits.
The leading bit is a 0 again, which means that
NOTE CONF
it's a length block, not a code block, because code
blocks always start with 1.
NOTE CONF
So I have to continue this process, change the 1st
0 to a 1.
NOTE CONF
Now I have 11.
11 in decimal is 33 plus 1 is 4.
NOTE CONF
Read the next 4 bits.
The most significant bit again is a zero, so change
NOTE CONF
that to a 1.
Now it's 1001.
NOTE CONF
decimal value of 1001 is 99 plus 1 is 10.
Read 10 bits.
NOTE CONF
The most significant bit is 1, not a zero.
I know it's a code component.
NOTE CONF
The decimal value would be 5621.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
It doesn't make sense.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Probing it into the lengths, what's the point of Very
good point.
NOTE CONF
So the question is, why were you doing -1?
That's because it guarantees, yes sir, why were you doing
NOTE CONF
-1?
OK, I'll answer this question and, and, um, so you're
NOTE CONF
doing -1 because the length would be strictly decreasing.
The length would be strictly decreasing, yes, exactly, at a
NOTE CONF
corner case.
And, and it'll be fewer number of bits.
NOTE CONF
Whenever you do a minus 1 implies that you're encoding
something lesser than what you should have encoded.
NOTE CONF
So it's a strictly decreasing function, captures all the information,
and it will terminate strictly to one.
NOTE CONF
So that's the only reason.
Uh, your question.
NOTE CONF
OK, beautiful question.
How does this encode one?
NOTE CONF
So what would be the Elias Omega code for one?
I have, how many of you say it's one?
NOTE CONF
Raise your hands.
How many of you thinks 01?
NOTE CONF
OK, why should it be 01?
So can if all the codes greater than 1 start
NOTE CONF
with a 0, how can one be a prefix of
anything?
NOTE CONF
With all the numbers, I'll in fact bring up this
code, I'll give you.
NOTE CONF
So everything I said is essentially captured on the slide.
Um, so whatever I said encoded 561, whatever I've done.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I don't like, yeah, so, essentially, that's the
string, um, all the reds which became 02 01, so
NOTE CONF
that's 001,0001, 10, that's the final encoded bit string.
Now, essentially, the code words would be the binary code
NOTE CONF
word for uh N equals 1 is you start with
the minimal binary representation of N equals 1, which is
NOTE CONF
1, that is one bit long, stop.
OK, so that's what you stop at one bit, right?
NOTE CONF
So the whole process of encoding stops at one bit,
so you stop.
NOTE CONF
So, And because all subsequent integers would have to start
with zeros, because there are at least uh the binary
NOTE CONF
representation is at least 2 bits long.
Minimal binary representation of 2 is 10, 2 bits long,
NOTE CONF
so you would have to first encode that minus 1
would be 2 minus 1 is 1, that's the length
NOTE CONF
is 2 bits.
Number is 2, length is also 2 minus 1, the
NOTE CONF
length minus 1 would be 1, so that would be
10 would be the code word.
NOTE CONF
You stop at 1, but because it's a length component
that 1 is changed to a zero.
NOTE CONF
OK?
So you, uh, here are the values.
NOTE CONF
So what you see here are the values you're encoding
in each part, right?
NOTE CONF
So if you have 16, you will have 10,000, which
is basically what you will be the last value in
NOTE CONF
the last component, core component.
The length component would store 4 and 2 and 1.
NOTE CONF
Basically what you would end up storing uh in this
uh information would be uh those decimal values there and
NOTE CONF
when you are decoding it, you're repeating the process using
the leading bit whether it's turned on or off to
NOTE CONF
tell if it's a length component or a code component.
Any questions so far?
NOTE CONF
OK.
So what I then want to do is decoding also
NOTE CONF
I've done.
So what, what I've decoded, what, what it's saying is
NOTE CONF
to read, read, and then, so it's some sort of,
some sort of a pseudo code for you to read.
NOTE CONF
Everything that I wrote on the board, you can convert
it into a pseudo code.
NOTE CONF
Uh, where you're, you start the process by reading one
bit and you keep reading the blocks until you have
NOTE CONF
encountered a code component, decode it, and that when you
decode it, you're decoding the integer.
NOTE CONF
The last thing that you decode would be the number
that you've encoded.
NOTE CONF
Everything, uh, the prefix was just to make it prefix
free.
NOTE CONF
Now if this process.
Try and go through the process is very simple.
NOTE CONF
The pro in fact students usually like these questions in
the exam in general because they are the ones that
NOTE CONF
kind of very quickly give them the full marks for
the exam, right?
NOTE CONF
So, um, so it was an easy just by um
by uh experience students find learning these things quite easy.
NOTE CONF
Now all this is basically about all what I already
said that you could.
NOTE CONF
Make the code.
If the code is defined from 1 to 3 positive
NOTE CONF
integers, you can map it from to natural numbers, integers
greater than or equal to 0, and you can map
NOTE CONF
it to integers and all integers using some special tricks.
So because they're all countable sets and there is a
NOTE CONF
1 to 1 mapping between the two, their, their cardinality
is LF0.
NOTE CONF
All of them are the same, um, in the Cantorian
set theory.
NOTE CONF
So.
OK, so, very, in the last finale, um, I will
NOTE CONF
try and talk about Lempelsiv.
All you need.
NOTE CONF
So what did we, what we learned so far?
We know how to give a text, how to form
NOTE CONF
character encoding, and how to form integer encoding.
Now, if we did not have integer encoding, if you
NOTE CONF
have a text, you would have to just do Huffman
code words for each character, and that would be the
NOTE CONF
best you can do.
But that is only exploiting redundancy of characters.
NOTE CONF
It is not.
Exploiting redundancy of what um of larger things than a
NOTE CONF
character.
OK.
NOTE CONF
There can be words that are same, sometimes there are
sentences that are same, depending on the text, you want
NOTE CONF
to Essentially, when something is repeating the first time you're
doing it, you are stating it whatever how many bits
NOTE CONF
it takes, and then the next time you saw a
copy of it, you say it's like that copy I
NOTE CONF
saw previously, so you need to be able to encode
it with certain, um, certain memory, right?
NOTE CONF
So you, I, when I can look back in my
text, uh.
NOTE CONF
As far as I can see, depending on some choices
you make, some parameters that you use, you say, if
NOTE CONF
I see this far in my text, Whatever I'm encoding
now appeared previously some time ago.
NOTE CONF
And why do I, why did we introduce the integer
codes is because when I say appeared previously, you have
NOTE CONF
to say how far it was away from the, from
the current position, how far is an integer in terms
NOTE CONF
of what you're encoding, so you'll be able to use
the combination of Huffman codes and integer codes to, to
NOTE CONF
essentially.
Come up with um a compression algorithm.
NOTE CONF
This is such a simple algorithm.
Lempel-Zev in 1977, came up with this sliding window-based algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Which is used in all things, uh, all programmes, including
your zip.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's just an optimised version of it, but if
you wrote your own zip, it will be with those
NOTE CONF
two encoding schemes, Huffman code codes and uh Elias Omega
code, it will be as pretty good.
NOTE CONF
You would get most of the compression already, OK.
Uh, you might not be able to run it as
NOTE CONF
fast because there are a lot of, um, tricks about
the data structures that you use to make the whole
NOTE CONF
thing run fast, but in terms of how much compression
you can squeeze out of it, it's already quite a
NOTE CONF
lot.
OK, so let's actually see this algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to the board again.
So, the algorithm is, again, very, very simple.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to give you a general iteration and
then go through an example.
NOTE CONF
We'll go through the example in detail.
So, Let's say that you are in the middle of
NOTE CONF
the algorithm.
Something has been encoded.
NOTE CONF
So when you're encoding, you're going from left to right
of the string.
NOTE CONF
So, Let's assume that you're thinking from the middle.
That means that everything before has been encoded.
NOTE CONF
Now Now, in the future, you want to encode the
remaining stuff, that's what you're trying to do.
NOTE CONF
So for that, I need to have some memory, OK?
Can you pay attention here, please, everyone?
NOTE CONF
So, I need some memory.
So I need some memory.
NOTE CONF
Of things that I have seen previously, I'll just bring
that up.
NOTE CONF
So, I have a search window.
So when I'm encoding in the future, just whatever the
NOTE CONF
context before it forms the search window.
Now, in principle, your search windows can be As far
NOTE CONF
as the text would go on the left side, right?
So you can actually be able to see the entire
NOTE CONF
encoded string previously.
But for that, You, you kind of, you have to
NOTE CONF
search in that window to be able to detect.
So the idea would be that if I have a
NOTE CONF
search window, and I'm encoding this, I want to find
the longest substring alpha starting at some position I that
NOTE CONF
I'm encoding, that I have seen previously.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Have I seen how, what is the longest substring starting
at I that I have seen previously in my search
NOTE CONF
window.
Now, if obviously that words almost sound very similar to
NOTE CONF
stuff that we have learned in the previous weeks when
you do pattern matching and stuff like that, but there
NOTE CONF
are.
Efficient data structures, some of which you have already learned.
NOTE CONF
I'll let you think about, digest what data structures you
could use, but what you need to do is to
NOTE CONF
find at each position what would be the longest, the
longest substring starting at this position that I have seen
NOTE CONF
in my search window.
Now this position.
NOTE CONF
Is some P, right?
So if you have a data structure that tells you
NOTE CONF
that the longest substring at I That I have seen
previously in the search window is P, then I can
NOTE CONF
encode this, everything that follows as.
Uh, offset.
NOTE CONF
Land And next character.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, I will talk, talk to what this, so what
is the offset?
NOTE CONF
If I'm at I, I have um I have to,
I've saw, saw alpha, some data structure tells me that
NOTE CONF
whatever I'm seeing, the next, uh, let's say the length
of alpha is L, the next L letters, so that's
NOTE CONF
L letters, length is L.
The next L letters are identical to A substring starting
NOTE CONF
at P of the same length.
Then my offset would be what?
NOTE CONF
How far is P from I?
What's the length?
NOTE CONF
And the next character that comes after it.
is being encoded, which is, I'll just call it C.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Let's say if that character is C.
NOTE CONF
So, now let's dissect this.
What is, so I'm encoding at every stage.
NOTE CONF
A triple, a triple of offset length and next character.
What kind of uh object is an offset, an integer
NOTE CONF
or a character?
Integer.
NOTE CONF
Can you use Elias omega code to encode an integer?
Yes, so offset is done using Elias omega code.
NOTE CONF
What is length?
Length is an integer.
NOTE CONF
is encoded using EIS Omega code.
Next character is a character that you can encode using
NOTE CONF
Huffman code, yeah.
So, which means that when you see a string, before
NOTE CONF
you even start this process, you would have to scan
that string, construct its Elias, uh uh constructed, no, sorry,
NOTE CONF
constructed Huffman code, and then start the scanning process left
to right.
NOTE CONF
And then at each iteration, you have a search window.
Now, one thing I also should have said was, there
NOTE CONF
is, so that's the point that you're encoding.
So there's a context, which is, so you're dividing your
NOTE CONF
view into three parts, your present, or rather present, and
two parts, present and future.
NOTE CONF
So that's the past.
That's the present.
NOTE CONF
And that's the future.
Yeah, so what you're trying to do is you're saying
NOTE CONF
that I can see in the past up to a
certain size.
NOTE CONF
I can see into the future up to a certain
size.
NOTE CONF
Now, there's no reason why you can't say my past
is the start, my future is the end.
NOTE CONF
OK?
Now, why do you have this, so you have a
NOTE CONF
search window, let me go through the algorithm.
You have a search window is the past, look-ahead buffer
NOTE CONF
is the present plus the future, what you're encoding right
now and whatever you're copying into.
NOTE CONF
So when you, when you start copying from here, you're
going into the future.
NOTE CONF
Now, in principle, there's nothing stopping you from copying all
the way to the end if you have the data
NOTE CONF
structures that permit you to, except that by choosing.
Sensible dictionaries and um and look-ahead buffers, sensible search windows
NOTE CONF
and look-ahead buffers, you are, the memory pressure of maintaining
the data structure is smaller.
NOTE CONF
So if you have the full, then your data structure
has to hold the entire information at the end of
NOTE CONF
it.
It'll have all possible searching.
NOTE CONF
Um, all possible substrings that you want to search has
to be, um, has to be present in that data
NOTE CONF
structure.
But if you have a smaller, uh, window, that means
NOTE CONF
that your, your search data structure is contained.
It's contained by the length, the parameters of how much
NOTE CONF
the search window is, how much the look look ahead
buffer would be.
NOTE CONF
Now I'll say this in slightly different.
In ways that you understand, it's the memory pressure of
NOTE CONF
doing the encoding.
When you're doing the encoding, you need to have some
NOTE CONF
data structures to search and then copy, yeah, and and
copy that using those, those things.
NOTE CONF
Now if it's arbitrarily large, if it's all the way
to the start, your text can be terabytes of information,
NOTE CONF
right?
So you could be having a search data structures over
NOTE CONF
terabytes of information.
You need to.
NOTE CONF
Ensure that your data structure is bounded in some feasible
way.
NOTE CONF
Now, most, if you let's say that if I say
my past is 1 MB, which is actually very conservative,
NOTE CONF
1 MB is what?
1 million characters.
NOTE CONF
It's already a lot of past that you have seen
for most, for most applications, that's more than enough because
NOTE CONF
you're going to the past.
So usually you have Um, tens of, uh, megabytes that
NOTE CONF
these, um, these, uh, so if you're running zip with,
if you're running Gzip with -9 option, uh, -9, it
NOTE CONF
gives states that use a bigger search window so that
you can squeeze more out of, out of the compression.
NOTE CONF
So if, let's not worry about the parameters right now.
If you assume that there was a search window and
NOTE CONF
a look-ahead buffer, what do we do with it?
To encode any character or substring, you're going to find
NOTE CONF
the longest match substring starting in the dictionary and ending
uh.
NOTE CONF
Before the end of the look, look ahead, we'll look
at an example.
NOTE CONF
And then you're uh you're encoding offset using integer code
length of an integer code and the next character is
NOTE CONF
an integer code.
So if you then essentially you're generating an encoding as
NOTE CONF
a tuple.
By the way, it won't be 3 pieces of information,
NOTE CONF
logically, it won't be, there's no comma that you will
see.
NOTE CONF
You will see a stream of bits for offset, followed
by a stream of bits for length, followed by a
NOTE CONF
stream of bits for the character, all in succession.
Because they are decodable, if you know that it is
NOTE CONF
a triple that you're reading, you decode using Elias Omega
code, decode using the length, decode using the Huffman, and
NOTE CONF
that's what you end up, end up getting in this,
um, in the strategy.
NOTE CONF
So let's look at an example.
So here's a simple example.
NOTE CONF
These are not real parameters.
You never use search window of 6 characters, which is
NOTE CONF
basically less than 1 byte.
06 bytes.
NOTE CONF
Um, I should, um, I would say.
So Um, so if you have a, if your past
NOTE CONF
is 6 characters, present and future is 4 characters, if
that's for it, you're starting the, you have to encode
NOTE CONF
the string.
So I'm going to now encode it in human.
NOTE CONF
Uh, triples offset length and, um, and character, you can
run the binary version of it, um, yourself, but this
NOTE CONF
is to understand the mechanics when you start.
You have to start encoding from this point, the point
NOTE CONF
where the left most of the string.
So have I seen the past so far?
NOTE CONF
So what is the offset I can copy in the
past?
NOTE CONF
0.
I can't, there's nothing in the, in the past that
NOTE CONF
I can copy.
So I can't copy anything.
NOTE CONF
And the next character after a nothing copy is the
character that I'm coding.
NOTE CONF
So the first pupil would be 00, and A.
That's because there was nothing previously I could copy.
NOTE CONF
There was offset was 0.
Length was 0 and character was A.
NOTE CONF
Now, A is an integer, uh sorry, uh, offset is
an integer, length is an integer, A is a Huffman
NOTE CONF
code.
Because I'm starting from zero, I have to map the
NOTE CONF
code for 1 to 0.
Yeah, so I'm using the positive integer code mapped from
NOTE CONF
0123 range.
So code that you have for 1 is mapped to
NOTE CONF
0, code that you have for 2 is mapped to
1, code that you have for 3 is mapped to
NOTE CONF
2, and so on, yeah.
In your, so what you would have is when you're
NOTE CONF
getting the Elias code for 0, you have a routine
which is calling Elias omega code for positive integers with
NOTE CONF
an argument incremented by 1.
So if I want a 0, you pass an argument
NOTE CONF
plus 1.
So 0 + 1 would be 1, so you'd be
NOTE CONF
getting back the code for 1 rather than 0, because
the coding starts from 1 in your positive code.
NOTE CONF
So first, Nothing, nothing was copied.
The length was zero.
NOTE CONF
The next character that I have to encode after nothing
is the character where I'm standing at.
NOTE CONF
So the yellow bit is what you have encoded, OK.
So by this topple, which will be in binary format,
NOTE CONF
OK, so what would be the code for zero in
Elias 1 bit 1 because it is mapped to the
NOTE CONF
code for number 1.
The code for number 1 is 1.
NOTE CONF
So it'll be 11, and whatever the Huffman code for
A for that example.
NOTE CONF
So you have to construct the Huffman code A priori
before you have, you're running this process.
NOTE CONF
Now, then once you've done that, now your search window.
Is of size 6 maximum, but you only have one
NOTE CONF
available.
You have encoded A.
NOTE CONF
Now you're starting this process from this point.
You're wherever the second A is.
NOTE CONF
Now what is the longest substring that I can copy?
In from the past, starting from the current position.
NOTE CONF
So A is the same as A.
The next C is different from this A, so it's
NOTE CONF
of length 1.
So go back 1, offset 1, copy one letter, and
NOTE CONF
the next character after that letter is C.
Can you see that?
NOTE CONF
So I was here, I've copied A and the next
character after that is C.
NOTE CONF
Previously, I, there was nothing to copy, so you had
to uh say A, I'll go back.
NOTE CONF
So previously there was nothing to copy, so the next
character was A.
NOTE CONF
Here, you say, well, if I've encode what's coming after
this orange bar, go back 1.
NOTE CONF
Copy a substring of length one from that position, and
then the character after that is C, so that's 11
NOTE CONF
C.
So now, you're offsetting an integer one, which is encoded
NOTE CONF
using the positive integer code 2, you know.
So, so you have to encode using EIS code 2
NOTE CONF
because you're doing a code starting from 0 rather than
1, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So 1 1C is is copied.
Now, Once you have copied this information, all AAC has
NOTE CONF
been encoded, so when you start the next process, AAC
is in the past.
NOTE CONF
Because first you encoded A, then A and C.
So AAC is already encoded.
NOTE CONF
Now, ask yourself, what is the longest code, uh, longest
substring I can copy from this point.
NOTE CONF
So orange point, orange place where the orange separator is
there, is where the present and the future starts.
NOTE CONF
The look-ahead buffer starts.
So what's the longest substring in the dictionary that matches
NOTE CONF
the substring in the Lucahe buffer?
So A is the same, the next A is same,
NOTE CONF
the next C is same.
It's actually spilling over.
NOTE CONF
Next A is, is also the same.
So there are, and it so happens that you could
NOTE CONF
have gone more here.
It turns out that AAC A matches A A C
NOTE CONF
A.
The next character after the copy is A and after
NOTE CONF
the position is B.
Their mismatched, but let's assume the next character was an
NOTE CONF
A.
So let's say that was not a B and A,
NOTE CONF
you still stop where the look ahead buffer ends, so
to speak.
NOTE CONF
So look-ahead buffer is bounding how far you can copy
as well, because you're, you need a search data structure
NOTE CONF
even though.
It is good to copy as long as you want.
NOTE CONF
You would have a memory pressure in maintaining the search
data structures for arbitrarily long strings.
NOTE CONF
So in this example, you could go back 3, so
offset is 123, and copy 1234 letters, which is A
NOTE CONF
A C A.
That's what you're doing.
NOTE CONF
The next character after that, so in the worst case,
you would be looking at one position after the look
NOTE CONF
ahead buffer period.
All the copies would be within the look ahead buffer.
NOTE CONF
The next character would be in the worst case, one
position after the look-ahead buffer.
NOTE CONF
There's no reason why you could have said the next
character is where the look-ahead buffer ends.
NOTE CONF
It's just the way you've set up the algorithm.
But the whole idea is that look-ahead buffer is bounded,
NOTE CONF
OK, so there's a bound on the look ahead buffer
and the search window.
NOTE CONF
So, so once you copy that, all this became free.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So because you just not free, but was encoded in
that pieces of information.
NOTE CONF
So then you can go back by And go to
the next one.
NOTE CONF
So all of this has been done.
So look at my, uh, search window is now bounded
NOTE CONF
by 6 because now I have more information.
I've seen more before, but my, I can only search
NOTE CONF
in that.
Um, look for copies in that search window.
NOTE CONF
So I'm encoding this position.
What's the longest substring starting at that position in the
NOTE CONF
search window?
Well, if you go back three positions, C, A, B,
NOTE CONF
CAB appears there.
The next character after that would be um C in
NOTE CONF
on the copy side and A on the other side.
So, Offset is 3, length is 3, next character is
NOTE CONF
A, and if you keep doing this process over and
over again, so all I've done is repeated this process.
NOTE CONF
I get these code words.
Now, if, ah, let's actually do this example on the
NOTE CONF
board.
If I have, um, So, all these triples will be
NOTE CONF
in binary, by the way, but we'll just do this
in human readable format.
NOTE CONF
So if I had 00 A.
11C.
NOTE CONF
3 4B.
33 A.
NOTE CONF
And 123.
I can, if I know, if I can decode each
NOTE CONF
of the integers and the binaries of the integers and
binaries of the Huffman codes, you'll be sort of, once
NOTE CONF
you decode, you will see a zero.
So in the first, I have to decode the offset
NOTE CONF
zero, decode the um the length 0.
The next character is decoded from the Huffman tree would
NOTE CONF
be A.
So I'll start with my decoded letter, which would be
NOTE CONF
A.
So when I read the first one, I get an
NOTE CONF
A, then I have to decode the next.
I have, when I decode the Elias code.
NOTE CONF
I get one of the offset, one as an integer,
uh, a length, and one as the LIS code.
NOTE CONF
So I'm saying offset, go back 1, copy 1, next
letter is C.
NOTE CONF
Can you see that?
Now, that's done and dusted.
NOTE CONF
Now I have to copy decode 3, decode 4, decode
B.
NOTE CONF
So go back 123 positions.
Copy 4, A, A, C, A, And Next letter is
NOTE CONF
B.
That's done.
NOTE CONF
If I decode 33A, I have to say, go back
123, copy 3, C, A, B, the next letter is
NOTE CONF
A.
That's done.
NOTE CONF
Decode 12, and C.
So go back 1, copy 2, A.
NOTE CONF
A stop.
So there are essentially I can reconstruct the strings on
NOTE CONF
the pupils.
All you are, the only extra pieces, you need to
NOTE CONF
add information in the header.
So this is the second part of your, if you
NOTE CONF
actually look at your Zip file, it'll be two parts.
The first part is the header, and the second part
NOTE CONF
is the encoding that you're seeing here, but we're, we
are only looking at the encoding part.
NOTE CONF
What would the header contain?
It will contain what is the file name, um, how
NOTE CONF
many, how many characters does it have?
What would be its Huffman code?
NOTE CONF
What would be, so you have to encode the information
of.
NOTE CONF
The Huffman code, uh, one of the students talked about
how do you encode the information of the Huffman code
NOTE CONF
so you can basically either encode the tree or the
code words itself.
NOTE CONF
And one last piece of information is you need to
encode how many before you start this process the header
NOTE CONF
should contain how many of these triples am I going
to read.
NOTE CONF
I know that they are offset length and Huffman character
triples.
NOTE CONF
How many of them are there?
12345.
NOTE CONF
You can encode 5.
As uh Elias omega code, any integer, basically.
NOTE CONF
So you, you can encode any um uh integer using
that format.
NOTE CONF
Now, one last thing that I wanted to say, which
is So when you're encoding these things, you get these,
NOTE CONF
um these sort of bit streams.
So you're packing all of them as, as bytes, right?
NOTE CONF
So you're in a sense, you're packing them in, in
bytes.
NOTE CONF
Every 8 bits is stored in a byte because byte
is your atomic um uh.
NOTE CONF
Storage unit in your um in your computer or at
least uh how you logically store it so your um
NOTE CONF
you essentially have uh the stream of bits are packed
into a byte and that's the reason why when you
NOTE CONF
load a zip file you see gibberish because you're reading
these bytes which is basically a rendering of a fixed
NOTE CONF
width of something that is actually variable then now.
I've already done this part, um, in, on a slide.
NOTE CONF
So everything that we did on the board was basically
being done here.
NOTE CONF
Um, So one small uh variation, and we still have
time, so not, not at all a big deal.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, So, if you have, there's what's called a
variation, so there are thousands of variations or hundreds of
NOTE CONF
variations of Lempel Ziv after 77.
In fact, there is Lempel Ziv 88, there's Ziv Lempel
NOTE CONF
8878.
Um there are versions of uh these that kept improving.
NOTE CONF
Um, there are statistical encoders, beautiful topic to talk about
algorithmically for computer science students.
NOTE CONF
So they are predictive encodings basically, um, but Lempel Ziv,
um, uh, one easy accessible variation is the one for
NOTE CONF
English language, uh, empirically chosen, um, adapted algorithm for English
text, basically.
NOTE CONF
The adaptation is by Stroller and Zyansky.
I met Stroller in the data compression conference in Snowbird
NOTE CONF
7 or 8 years ago.
Um, asked him, I, I gave him some grief about
NOTE CONF
this algorithm, about the choices, but the idea would be
that um if you have this, uh, format, problem is
NOTE CONF
that it's always using this 3 triple format in every
instance.
NOTE CONF
But when you have a short copy, So if you
have a copy of length that is short, offset can
NOTE CONF
be fairly large, right?
So even if you have a one, let's say a
NOTE CONF
search window of 1 megabyte, that's the offset in the
worst case could be millions of characters down downstream, or
NOTE CONF
let's say tens of megabytes.
You can have an offset millions of, so let's say
NOTE CONF
an offset is 1 million.
But you're copying one.
NOTE CONF
So 1 million encoding in an integer takes a lot
of bits, right?
NOTE CONF
So it's the log of million plus log log of
that million plus log, log, log of that million.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so the code, uh, basically, you're spending a
lot of bits for short copies.
NOTE CONF
So what Ran and Zananski said was, well, I'll just
put a threshold of how large the copy can be.
NOTE CONF
If the copy is beyond a certain size, then I
will use the triple encoding in, in some way, um,
NOTE CONF
the offset length encoding in some way.
Uh, if it is basically of a short copy, I
NOTE CONF
will switch to, uh, 22 pieces of information are encoded
rather than the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
So what he, they called, what's called uh uh encoding
tupal, which is format 1, encode, encoding tupal that is
NOTE CONF
format 01 tells me, tells that it's a short copy,
0 tells that it's a long copy.
NOTE CONF
So when you say, when you first letter that you
first bit that you read is a 1.
NOTE CONF
It says that don't bother about offset and length, just
encode the Huffman character code for the character.
NOTE CONF
So it's just one telling you it is a character
encoding, there's no copy, don't bother about it.
NOTE CONF
So you have a bit one followed by the Huffman
code for the character.
NOTE CONF
The next apple is a bit zero followed by off
offset and length using that um uh threshold.
NOTE CONF
In fact, they did some analysis in 1980s and came
up with the value of a copy.
NOTE CONF
It seems for English text you will always win if
you take a copy of 3, which is empirically chosen.
NOTE CONF
Now what these pupils look like will be something like
this.
NOTE CONF
First one, there's no copy.
So bit one A, so that's what is copied, then
NOTE CONF
you've encoded um A already, now you're here.
Well, there is, if you're doing Lempelziv, you would have
NOTE CONF
done go back one.
Copy one and the next character is C.
NOTE CONF
You have triple encoding here, it says, well, the copy
is only 1, so I'll just abort and go into
NOTE CONF
a character encoding, which is bit one tells her it
is character encoding.
NOTE CONF
It is A, C, again, there's no copy, there's nothing
in the, in the search window that matches C.
NOTE CONF
So it's 1 C.
Then, then you can all these previous things were character
NOTE CONF
encoding, but let's see what happens when you sort of
have um A different encoding when you, so a substring
NOTE CONF
starting at this position appears 3 positions previously 123, and
you can copy 4, which is greater than the threshold
NOTE CONF
3 then basic uh greater than or equal to threshold
3, is it equal to, yeah, I think it's in.
NOTE CONF
Greater than equal to threshold basically.
So greater than if it's, if the copy length is
NOTE CONF
greater than equal to 3, you change the bit flat
to 0 and say it's offset and length encoding, and
NOTE CONF
you repeat this process based on the copy length.
You're doing exactly the same data structure, but you're changing
NOTE CONF
between two languages of encoding.
One language is the.
NOTE CONF
Format 0 language and one other form uh language is
format 1 because you don't, um, you don't, uh, decoder
NOTE CONF
will not know a priori which language you're using.
You have to signal what language it is by using
NOTE CONF
one or zero bit as the leading, um, sort of
signal flag to tell you which language to use when
NOTE CONF
you're decoding.
Well, so I kind of, um, I kind of went
NOTE CONF
through, um, the.
The reason I skipped the optimality proof was because um
NOTE CONF
I was worried I'll run out of time, but I
covered all the business end of the real stuff that
NOTE CONF
you'll implement.
Um, I will, uh, record something.
NOTE CONF
Um, it will, I will have a, actually, I'll have
a cute question about this, but give you a context
NOTE CONF
on, in some format either on a forum or through
a recording.
NOTE CONF
I might do this recording in one of the help
desk sessions and upload the, somebody should ask me, come
NOTE CONF
to the help desk and say, Arun, tell me why
it is optimal, and I'll record that session and post
NOTE CONF
it for you to read it.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Uh, any questions?
We're done for this lecture.
NOTE CONF
Any questions so far?
OK, I'll take it.
NOTE CONF
few questions.
I guess the first one is just.
NOTE CONF
Why do you need the half, the coding and the
Skype and not one year.
NOTE CONF
Very good question.
Actually, brilliant question.
NOTE CONF
I'm glad you asked this question.
Um, there's no reason why you should, uh, not do
NOTE CONF
so.